README.md, before:

# SDRranger
A tool for processing SDR-seq (targeted Single-cell DNA and RNA sequencing) fastq files into annotated BAM files and count matrices.

<p align="center">
  <img src="doc/SDRLoneRanger.png" width=50% alt="The Single-Cell DNA RNA Lone Ranger">
</p>
<p align="center">The Single-Cell DNA RNA Lone Ranger</p>

## Installation

SDRranger works in Linux, and has been tested on el8 and CentOS 7. 

You can install SDRranger from github directly into your local (conda or virtual) environment using pip:
```
pip install git+https://github.com/hawkjo/SDRranger.git
```
This typically takes a few minutes. 

[STAR aligner](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR)  needs to be installed independently as well.

## Usage

The basic usage for SDRranger can be displayed at any time via `SDRranger --help`:
```
  SDRranger count            <fastq_dir> (--STAR-ref-dir=<> | --STAR-output=<>...) --config=<> [--output-dir=<>] [--threads=<>] [-v | -vv | -vvv]
  SDRranger preprocess       <fastq_dir> --config=<> [--output-dir=<>] [--threads=<>] [-v | -vv | -vvv]
  SDRranger count_matrix     <SDR_bam_file> --output-dir=<> [--threads=<>] [-v | -vv | -vvv]
  SDRranger simulate_reads   --config=<> --fastq-prefix=<> --nreads=<> [--unique-umis=<>] [--seed=<>] [--error-probability=<>] [--substitution-probability=<>] [--insertion-probability=<>] [-v | -vv | -vvv]

Options:
  --STAR-ref-dir=<>:              Path to directory with STAR index.
  --STAR-output=<>:               Path to STAR output file (BAM/SAM). Can be repeated multiple times,
                                    in which case the order must correspond to the lexicographic ordering
                                    of paired FASTQ files in <fastq_dir>.
  --config=<>:                    Path to JSON configuration.
  --output-dir=<>:                Path to output directory [default: .].
  --threads=<>:                   Number of threads [default: 1].
  -v:                             Verbose output.
  --fastq-prefix=<>:              Prefix for output FASTQ files.
  --nreads=<>:                    Number of reads to simulate.
  --unique-umis=<>:               Fraction of all reads that have unique UMIs [default: 0.5].
  --seed=<>:                      Random seed [default: 42].
  --error-probability=<>:         Probability of an error occurring [default: 0.1]. Set to a negative number to
                                    always introduce as many errors as allowed by the configuration.
  --substitution-probability=<>:  Probability of generating a substitution as opposed to an indel [default: 0.7].
  --insertion-probability=<>:     Probability of generating an insertion as opposed to a deletion when generating an indel [default: 0.5].
  -h --help                       Show this screen.
  --version                       Show version.

Commands:
  preprocess       Preprocess files such that STAR can be run on the output.
  count            Process and count input files.
  count_matrix     Build a count matrix (or matrices) from an existing bam file.
  simulate_reads   Generate synthetic sequencing reads given a barcode configuration.
```
The barcode details are input via a json configuration file, of which standard gDNA and RNA versions can be found in the `examples` folder. 

STAR references need to be prebuilt and their top directory input as a parameter.

### Outputs
The primary outputs from SDR ranger are:
* An annotated BAM file
* A read count matrix
* A UMI count matrix

#### BAM file tags
The BAM file is annotated with custom tags that have been created in the style of current community standards. These are:

| Tag | Meaning |
|--|--|
| CB | Cell barcode |
| CR | Raw, uncorrected cell barcode |
| UB | UMI |
| UR | Raw, uncorrected UMI |
| FL | Combined length of the linker sequences |

The cell barcode tag contains all pieces of the cell barcode, including the sample barcode, concatenated with periods.

## Examples

The `examples` folder contains small example gDNA and RNA datasets and corresponding example scripts and configuration files. The `cmd_gDNA_json.sh` and `cmd_cDNA_json.sh` files demonstrate proper syntax for their respective datasets and are runnable directly from within the examples folder. They each take about 20 seconds to run.

Commit message:

Update package name to bcwithqc throughout

README.md, after:

# bcwithqc
An end-to-end tool for processing fastq files with barcoded sequences into annotated fastq, BAM, and count matrix files. Inspired by single-cell DNA and RNA sequencing data, but much more general.

<p align="center">
  <img src="doc/SDRLoneRanger.png" width=50% alt="The Single-Cell DNA RNA Lone Ranger">
</p>
<p align="center">The Single-Cell DNA RNA Lone Ranger</p>

## Installation

bcwithqc works in Linux, and has been tested on el8 and CentOS 7. 

You can install bcwithqc from github directly into your local (conda or virtual) environment using pip:
```
pip install git+https://github.com/hawkjo/bcwithqc.git
```
This typically takes a few minutes. 

[STAR aligner](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR)  needs to be installed independently as well.

## Usage

The basic usage for bcwithqc can be displayed at any time via `bcwithqc --help`:
```
  bcwithqc count            <fastq_dir> (--STAR-ref-dir=<> | --STAR-output=<>...) --config=<> [--output-dir=<>] [--threads=<>] [-v | -vv | -vvv]
  bcwithqc preprocess       <fastq_dir> --config=<> [--output-dir=<>] [--threads=<>] [-v | -vv | -vvv]
  bcwithqc count_matrix     <bcwithqc_bam_file> --output-dir=<> [--threads=<>] [-v | -vv | -vvv]
  bcwithqc simulate_reads   --config=<> --fastq-prefix=<> --nreads=<> [--unique-umis=<>] [--seed=<>] [--error-probability=<>] [--substitution-probability=<>] [--insertion-probability=<>] [-v | -vv | -vvv]

Options:
  --STAR-ref-dir=<>:              Path to directory with STAR index.
  --STAR-output=<>:               Path to STAR output file (BAM/SAM). Can be repeated multiple times,
                                    in which case the order must correspond to the lexicographic ordering
                                    of paired FASTQ files in <fastq_dir>.
  --config=<>:                    Path to JSON configuration.
  --output-dir=<>:                Path to output directory [default: .].
  --threads=<>:                   Number of threads [default: 1].
  -v:                             Verbose output.
  --fastq-prefix=<>:              Prefix for output FASTQ files.
  --nreads=<>:                    Number of reads to simulate.
  --unique-umis=<>:               Fraction of all reads that have unique UMIs [default: 0.5].
  --seed=<>:                      Random seed [default: 42].
  --error-probability=<>:         Probability of an error occurring [default: 0.1]. Set to a negative number to
                                    always introduce as many errors as allowed by the configuration.
  --substitution-probability=<>:  Probability of generating a substitution as opposed to an indel [default: 0.7].
  --insertion-probability=<>:     Probability of generating an insertion as opposed to a deletion when generating an indel [default: 0.5].
  -h --help                       Show this screen.
  --version                       Show version.

Commands:
  preprocess       Preprocess files such that STAR can be run on the output.
  count            Process and count input files.
  count_matrix     Build a count matrix (or matrices) from an existing bam file.
  simulate_reads   Generate synthetic sequencing reads given a barcode configuration.
```
The barcode details are input via a json configuration file, of which standard gDNA and RNA versions can be found in the `examples` folder. 

STAR references need to be prebuilt and their top directory input as a parameter.

### Outputs
The primary outputs from bcwithqc are:
* An annotated BAM file
* A read count matrix
* A UMI count matrix

#### BAM file tags
The BAM file is annotated with custom tags that have been created in the style of current community standards. These are:

| Tag | Meaning |
|--|--|
| CB | Cell barcode |
| CR | Raw, uncorrected cell barcode |
| UB | UMI |
| UR | Raw, uncorrected UMI |
| FL | Combined length of the linker sequences |

The cell barcode tag contains all pieces of the cell barcode, including the sample barcode, concatenated with periods.

## Examples

The `examples` folder contains small example gDNA and RNA datasets and corresponding example scripts and configuration files. The `cmd_gDNA_json.sh` and `cmd_cDNA_json.sh` files demonstrate proper syntax for their respective datasets and are runnable directly from within the examples folder. They each take about 20 seconds to run.
